Add 'Learn' guides (#48)
OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-docs: components/learn/modules/ROOT/pages/unit-testing.adoc

= Testing Smart Contracts

In a blockchain environment, a single mistake could cost you all of your funds (or even worse, your users'!). This guide will teach you how to write automated tests that verify your application behaves exactly as you intended.

> == About Testing

Reviewer: I'd drop this section, assuming that the reader already knows what a test is. We can make some clarifications about unit vs e2e tests, and ganache vs regular nodes (taking a page out of [React's docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/testing.html)).

> If you ever wrote a program, you also run into to see what happens. That was a test. But not a great one, because you then had to re-run your test manually for every single change to your code. Enter automated testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you ever wrote a program, you also ran it to see what happens. That was a test. But not a great one, because you then had to re-run your test manually for every single change to your code. Enter automated testing.
```

Instead of doing things manually, we'll write simple programs ('tests') that will feed your smart contract some input, and then observe how it behaves. If the observed behavior matches the expected one, the test passes!

The sort of tests we'll write here are called https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing[unit tests]. These are multiple small, focused tests, which each check a small part of your contract for correctness. They can often be expressed in single sentences, which make up a specification: 'the admin is able to pause the contract', 'transferring tokens emits an event', 'non-admins cannot mint new tokens', etc.

== Unit Tests for Solidity Contracts

You may be wondering _how_ we're going to run these tests, since smart contracts are executed inside a blockchain. Using the actual Ethereum network would be very expensive, and while testnets are free, they are also slow (with blocktimes between 5 and 15 seconds). If we intend to run hundreds of tests whenever we make a change to our code, we need something better.

> What we will use is called a _local blockchain_: a slimmed down version of the real thing, disconnected from the Internet, running on your machine. This will simplify things quite a bit: you won't need to go get Ether, and you won't have to wait for blocks to be mined.

Reviewer: Let's link to another guide where we explain what ganache is

== Setting up Your Test Script

For the test themselves, you will need to also install a JavaScript _test runner_. You are free to use any of the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-environment/blob/master/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/setup.adoc#test-runners[recommended ones]: for this guide, we'll pick https://mochajs.org/[Mocha] with https://www.chaijs.com/[Chai] assertions.

```bash
$ npm install --save-dev mocha chai
```

Conventionally, test files are stored in a `test` directory. How these look will depend on the test runner of choice: below is a sample of a simple one using Mocha and Chai.

```javascript
const { accounts, contract } = require('@openzeppelin/test-environment');
const { expect } = require('chai');

// Load compiled artifacts
const MyToken = contract.fromArtifact('MyToken');

describe('MyToken', function () {
  const [ deployer ] = accounts;

  // Test case
  it('deployer has initial supply', async function () {
    // Deploy the token contract

>     const token = await MyToken.new(100, { from: deployer });

Reviewer: I'd include a reference to and the code for the subject-under-test

= Testing Smart Contracts

In a blockchain environment, a single mistake could cost you all of your funds - or even worse, your users'!. This guide will help you develop robust applications by writing automated tests that verify your application behaves exactly as you intended.

We'll cover the following topics:

 * <<setting-up-a-testing-environment, Setting up a Testing Environment>>
 * <<writing-unit-tests, Writing Unit Tests>>

>  * <<performing-complex-assertions, Performing Complex Assertions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * <<performing-complex-assertions, Performing Complex Assertions>>
```

When it comes to smart contract development though, practice has shown that https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing[_contract unit testing_] is exceptionally worthwhile. These tests are simple to write and and quick to run, and let you add features and fix bugs in your code with confidence.

Smart contract unit testing consists of multiple small, focused tests, which each check a small part of your contract for correctness. They can often be expressed in single sentences that make up a specification, such as 'the admin is able to pause the contract', 'transferring tokens emits an event' or 'non-admins cannot mint new tokens'.

[[setting-up-a-testing-environment]]
== Setting up a Testing Environment

You may be wondering _how_ we're going to run these tests, since smart contracts are executed inside a blockchain. Using the actual Ethereum network would be very expensive, and while testnets are free, they are also slow (with blocktimes between 5 and 15 seconds). If we intend to run hundreds of tests whenever we make a change to our code, we need something better.

> What we will use is called a _local blockchain_: a slimmed down version of the real thing, disconnected from the Internet, running on your machine. This will simplify things quite a bit: you won't need to go get Ether, and you won't have to wait for blocks to be mined.

Reviewer: > and you won't have to wait for blocks to be mined.

This could lead to confusion, as it reads like blocks are not mined in this version. I'd rephrase explaining that blocks are mined instantly instead.

To aid us in this we'll use the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-environment#readme[*OpenZeppelin Test Environment*], a JavaScript library that will take care of setting up our local blockchain.

> TIP: If you've read the xref:interact.adoc['Interacting with Your Contracts' guide], you will already be familiar with https://github.com/trufflesuite/ganache-cli/[Ganache]. Test Environment works in a similar way, but is much easier to use.

Reviewer: > works in a similar way, but is much easier to use.

Let's be fair to them and explain that test-env spins up a ganache under the hood, and gets everything configured for you.

To install the OpenZeppelin Test Environment, run:

```bash
$ npm install --save-dev @openzeppelin/test-enviroment
```

> Once you `require` the library from your JavaScript code, it will automatically run a local testing blockchain for you. It also exports variables and functions related to this environment, such as a list of `accounts` that have been pre-funded with Ether, and convenient ways to load your contracts from their compiled artifacts.

Reviewer: > It also exports variables and functions related to this environment,

I may be pushing too far (which is ultimately your fault, because you picked up the last round of suggestions and applied them superbly), but I'd remove this statement as it adds no information at all. Avoid these kind of introductions, and just go to the point directly. For example:

> Once you `require` the library from your JavaScript code, it will automatically run a local testing blockchain. It also exports the list of usable `accounts` that have been pre-funded, and a `contract` function to load your artifacts, among others.

```javascript
const { accounts, contract } = require('@openzeppelin/test-environment#readme');

// Use the different accounts, which are unlocked and funded with Ether
const [ admin, deployer, user ] = accounts;

// Create a contract object from a compilation artifact
const MyContract = contract.fromArtifact('MyContract');
```

> For detailed information on these exported values and their usage, refer to Test Environment's https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-environment/blob/master/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/api.adoc[API reference].

Reviewer: Should we add a _Tip_ block explaining that the default account is not listed? I find it an interesting design decision, and presenting it in an aside block allows the reader to just skip through it. It could also lead to confusion for a user that goes a bit in depth, so documenting it up front may help avoid this.

[[writing-unit-tests]]
== Writing Unit Tests

In order to actually run your tests, you will need to also install a JavaScript _test runner_. You are free to use any of the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-environment/blob/master/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/setup.adoc#test-runners[recommended ones]: for this guide, we'll pick https://mochajs.org/[Mocha] with https://www.chaijs.com/[Chai] assertions.

```bash
$ npm install --save-dev mocha chai
```

Create a `test` directory: this is where you will keep your test files. These are best structured by mirroring xref:write-contracts#setting-up-a-solidity-project[the `contracts` directory]: for each `.sol` file there, create a corresponding `.test.js` file.

> Time to write our first tests! These will test properties of the `SetAndGet` contract xref:write-contracts#set-and-get-contract[from previous guides].

Reviewer: Feedback I've got from the book is that it's not always clear in which file we should place the code. Even though you have explained it in the previous paragraph, it may be simpler for the user if you either explicitly name the file in this paragraph, or add it as a leading comment in the code block, like `// test/contracts/SetAndGet.sol`.

Author: Ohh, I like the leading comment bit

> Time to write our first tests! These will test properties of the `SetAndGet` contract xref:write-contracts#set-and-get-contract[from previous guides].

Reviewer: Can we add the relevant code from SetAndGet here? Also, may I suggest using Box or IntBox as contract name?

Author: The name was just a placeholder, I like `Box`.

I tried having the contract here, but it led to the guide being drowned in code. I'll try improving this with prose.

// Load compiled artifacts
const SetAndGet = contract.fromArtifact('SetAndGet');

// Start test block
describe('SetAndGet', function () {
  const [ owner ] = accounts;

  beforeEach(async function () {
    // Deploy a new contract for each test
    this.contract = await SetAndGet.new({ from: owner });
  });

  // Test case
  it('get returns a value previously set', async function () {
    // Set a value
    await this.contract.set(42, { from: owner });

    // Test the returned value is the same one - values from the blockchain are
    // often read as strings
    expect((await this.contract.get()).toString()).to.equal('42');
  });
});
```

TIP: Many books have been written about how to structure unit tests: for a quick reference, check out the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/tree/master/test[tests for OpenZeppelin Contracts], or the following https://medium.com/coinmonks/how-to-test-ethereum-smart-contracts-ac28fa852281[guide for ERC20 tests].

We are now ready to run our tests! The best way to do this is by adding a `test` script to your `package.json`:

[source,diff]
----
 'scripts': {
+  'test': 'mocha --exit --recursive test'
 }
----

> With this, running `npm test` will execute all tests in the `test` directory, checking that your contracts work the way you meant them too.

Reviewer: Should we show the sample output? It often helps when rounding up a concept.

> TIP: Don't forget to re-compile your contracts if you make changes to them!

Reviewer: How about suggesting to use `oz compile && mocha --exit --recursive test` as test script in this block?

> It's also a very good idea at this point to set up a Continuous Integration service such as https://circleci.com/[CircleCI] to make your tests run automatically every time you commit your code to GitHub.

Reviewer: We need a guide on this!

Author: I'm thinking about mentioning CI services in our Dev Environment Setup guide, where we go over npm, yarn, etc.

> 

Reviewer: Should we add a paragraph explaining that it's possible to configure the environment set up by test-env via a config file, in case the reader needs more complex set ups, and link to the reference?

Author: I tried putting this paragraph in the previous section and it didn't fit, but this _is_ a good spot for it. Thanks!

[[performing-complex-assertions]]
== Performing Complex Assertions

> Many interesting properties of your contracts can be hard to capture with JavaScript primitives, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many interesting properties of your contracts may be hard to capture, such as:
```

 * verifying that the contract reverts on errors
 * measuring by how much an account's Ether balance changed

>  * validating the values of emitted events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * checking that the proper events are emitted
```

> https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-helpers#readme[*OpenZeppelin Test Helpers*] is a library designed to help you test all of these properties. It will also let you simulate time passing on the blockchain, handle very large numbers, and have easy access to common constants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-helpers#readme[*OpenZeppelin Test Helpers*] is a library designed to help you test all of these properties. It will also simplify the tasks of simulating time passing on the blockchain and handling very large numbers.
```
I left common constants out of the suggestion because I don't know what it refers to. I'd include it, but explaining _what_ constants are those.

> Begin by installing it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```bash
$ npm install --save-dev @openzeppelin/test-helpers
```

> Because Test Environment will detect this installation and configure it for you, we can get started using the library right away:

Reviewer: > Because Test Environment will detect this installation and configure it for you

Let's push this down to after we show how to use it. Here I'd just mention to get started using it.

```javascript
const { accounts, contract } = require('@openzeppelin/test-environment');
const { expectEvent, expectRevert } = require('@openzeppelin/test-helpers');
const { expect } = require('chai');

const SetAndGet = contract.fromArtifact('SetAndGet');

describe('SetAndGet', function () {
  const [ owner, other ] = accounts;

  beforeEach(async function () {
    this.contract = await SetAndGet.new({ from: owner });
  });

  it('get returns a value previously set', async function () {
    await this.contract.set(42, { from: owner });

    // Use large integer comparisons

>     expect(await this.contract.get()).to.be.bignumber.equal('42');

Reviewer: Do we have anything to highlight code fragments in code blocks? cc @frangio

Author: Even highlighting the whole line would be useful I think

Author: Given that we're using comments to point out things about the code, what if we made those pop a bit more? They're sort of hard to spot at the moment, having low contrast and italic font.

  });

  it('set emits an event', async function () {
    const receipt = await this.contract.set(42);

    // Test that a ValueChanged event was emitted with the new value
    expectEvent(receipt, 'ValueChanged', { newValue: 42 });
  });

  it('non owner cannot set new value', async function () {
    // Test the transaction reverts
    await expectRevert(
      this.contract.set(42, { from: other }),
      'Ownable: caller is not the owner'
    );
  });
});
```

> 

Reviewer: Here, I'd add a _Tip_ or _Heads up_ block explaining that you can use test-helpers without test-env, but if you do so you will need to configure them, and direct the user to the reference explaining how.

> The Test Helpers are very useful, and will let you write powerful assertions without having to worry about the low-level details of the underlying Ethereum libraries. To learn more about what you can do with them, head to their https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-helpers#reference[API reference].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Test Helpers will let you write powerful assertions without having to worry about the low-level details of the underlying Ethereum libraries. To learn more about what you can do with them, head to their https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-test-helpers#reference[API reference].
```
